HOPE.
I WANTED THE TYPE OF STUFF YOU
BE AS NICE AS YOU CAN TO
THESE KIDS BECAUSE THEY'VE BEEN
THROUGH A LOT.
DIFFERENT HOMES EVERY TIME,
LIVING WITH DIFFERENT PEOPLE.
IT WOULD BE PRETTY HARD FOR YOU,
RIGHT?
* IF YOU NEVER TRY
YOU'LL NEVER KNOW *
* JUST WHAT YOU WERE *
HELLO.
I'M DIANE SAWYER.
AND WELCOME TO THIS SPECIAL
"PRIMETIME."
TONIGHT, WE ARE CALLING ALL
ANGELS, AND WE HOPE BY THE END
OF THIS HOUR, YOU'LL BE JOINING
IN.
WHAT IF WE COULD ALL AGREE THAT
BY TOMORROW MORNING SOMETHING
MUST CHANGE, THAT OUR NATION'S
MOST FRAGILE AND ABUSED CHILDREN
WOULD NO LONGER BE BOUNCED
AROUND FROM HOME TO HOME IN
AMERICA'S FOSTER CARE SYSTEM?
WHEN ALL THESE CHILDREN WANT IS
SOMEONE WHO STAYS FOREVER IN
THEIR LIVES.
AS WE BEGIN A FEW NUMBERS FOR
YOU.
THERE ARE 500,000 CHILDREN IN
FOSTER CARE TONIGHT, 20,000 OF
THEM AVAILABLE FOR ADOPTION --
120,000 OF THEM AVAILABLE FOR
ADOPTION.
THERE ARE OTHERS WHO HAVE MUCH
MORE DIFFICULT STRUGGLES AND SO
THE FIRST QUESTION WE'RE ASKING
IS, WHO WILL HELP SUMMER?
AN ANXIOUS LITTLE GIRL RIDES
IN THE BACK OF A CAR.
SHE HAS ALREADY LIVED IN FOUR
DIFFERENT PLACEMENTS, AND SHE'S
JUST 11 YEARS OLD.
YOU READY?
INSIDE THE STRANGE NEW PLACE,
A COUNSELOR ASKS WHETHER SHE'S
READY TO TALK ABOUT WHY SHE'S
REALLY THERE.
CAN YOU TELL ME WHY YOU THINK
YOU'RE HERE WITH US?
DON'T FEEL COMFORTABLE.
OKAY.
SUMMER, HAVE YOU EVER BEEN
SEXUALLY ACTIVE IN THE PAST?
DON'T FEEL COMFORTABLE.
OKAY.
MARYHURST IS A RESIDENTIAL
TREATMENT PROGRAM FOR GIRLS
STRUGGLING WITH THE TOUGHEST
CHILDHOODS.
THIS IS ONE OF THE YOUNGEST
GIRLS EVER TO ENTER.
OKAY.
DO YOU KNOW ANYBODY OF --
HER NAME IS SUMMER.
SHE IS ALTERNATELY SCARED AND
HIGH SPIRITED, SHY AND PLAYFUL.
HOW DO YOU DO THAT?
HER ROOM WOULD SUGGEST SHE'S
JUST ANOTHER AMERICAN PRETEEN.
ON THE WALL, JESSICA SIMPSON,
JESSICA ALBA, AND HER CRUSH TOBY
KEITH.
WHY DO YOU LIKE TOBY KEITH?
'CAUSE HE'S CUTE.
PLUS I WANT TO MARRY HIM ONE
DAY.
UH-HUH.
HE'LL PROBABLY BE 70 YEARS
OLD.
JUST LIKE ANY 11-YEAR-OLD
GIRL UNTIL YOU HEAR SUMMER'S
STORY.
SHE GREW UP IN A HOME WHERE THE
KIDS SAY THEIR MOTHER USED
DRUGS.
THE HOUSE HAD HOLES IN THE
FLOOR.
AND SO MANY COCKROACHES THEY
EMBEDDED INSIDE SUMMER'S EARS
AND HAD TO BE SURGICALLY
REMOVED.
I COULD FEEL THE COCKROACHES.
LOT OF DEAD ANIMALS IN THE
HOUSE.
SOCIAL WORKERS WENT INTO THE
HOME, AND THERE WAS A RAW DEER
LAYING ON THE KITCHEN TABLE.
AND THE KIDS WERE CUTTING PIECES
OF THE DEER OFF AND EATING IT
RAW.
YOU COULD SEE EVERY BONE IN
MY BODY, EVERY ONE.
WHERE DID YOU GET RAW DEER
MEAT?
IT WAS ON THE ROAD.
MOM GOT IT.
AND JUST BROUGHT IT AND LEFT
IT WILL THERE?
SHE WAS SCARED TO DEATH TO BE
AROUND ANY MALE FIGURE
WHATSOEVER.
SOCIAL WORKERS SAY SUMMER
TOLD THEM HOW SHE'D BEEN BEATEN
AND OF SEXUAL ABUSE BY MEN WHO
CAME TO SEE HER MOTHER.
AND YOU WERE HOW OLD?
6.
AND YOU DON'T LIKE MEN
BECAUSE WHAT?
THEY'RE MEAN.
THEY JUST ARE.
THEY'RE BUILT LIKE THAT.
BUILT TO BE MEAN, BUILT TO BE
STRONG.
THE MEYERS WHO HAVE FOSTERED
MORE THAN 20 CHILDREN SAY THEY
WERE UNPREPARED FOR WHAT SUMMER
HAD LEARNED.
AND SHE WAS STANDING IN THE
FLOOR DANCING LIKE -- AS IF SHE
WAS DOING A STRIPTEASE IN FRONT
OF OUR GRANDSON.
THEY SAY WHEN SHE PLAYED WITH
DOLLS, THEY WERE IN SEXUAL
POSITIONS.
WHEN I SAY, WHERE DO YOU SEE
THAT?
WELL, I USED TO SEE MOM AND --
SO-AND-SO.
-- SO-AND-SO NAKED ON THE BED
ALL TIME.
THE MOTHER WAS HAVING SEX AND
THE KIDS WERE ALL WATCHING.
AND THE THINGS DONE TO A
SEXUALLY ABUSED CHILD CAN TAKE
ON A TERRIBLE LIFE OF THEIR OWN.
SUMMER TELLS ME WHY SHE'S REALLY
AT MARYHURST.
THIS IS NOT MY STORY.
SHE SAYS SHE'S TRYING HARD TO
STOP, BUT SHE'S HAD A PROBLEM,
TOUCHING OTHER LITTLE KIDS,
WANTING TO DO TO THEM WHAT WAS
DONE TO HER.
BECAUSE I COULD RELAPSE
AGAIN.
YOU THINK SO?
WHAT SORT OF THING DO YOU
THINK MIGHT MAKE YOU DO THAT?
JUST SEEING A 3-YEAR-OLD.
AND WHY -- WHY WOULD A YOUNG
KID MAKE YOU WANT TO DO THAT?
I DON'T KNOW.
AND DO YOU THINK IT IS
SOMETHING THAT YOU DO BECAUSE
YOU'RE ANGRY OR SOMETHING THAT
YOU DO BECAUSE YOU'RE CURIOUS?
CURIOUS.
AND SOME BECAUSE ANGRY.
SOME BECAUSE I WANT TO GET
AS PART OF THERAPY, SHE
WRITES GRAPHIC DESCRIPTIONS
ABOUT THOSE FANTASIES, CLEARLY
THINGS ONLY ADULTS COULD HAVE
TAUGHT.
MAYBE SOMETHING INAPPROPRIATE OR
EVEN SOMETHING THAT WOULD BE
HURTFUL, BUT YOU RIGHT THAT --
WRITE THAT DOWN AND THEN YOU
DON'T DO IT.
I SEE.
SUMMER ALSO WRITES LETTERS,
NEVER SENT, TO THOSE WHO
SEXUALLY ABUSED HER.
YOU CAN READ IT.
"DEAR" AND I WON'T SAY THE
NAME, "I WANT TO TELL YOU HOW I
FELT --."
YOU CAN READ IT KIND OF LIKE
LOWER.
LIKE LOW.
PEOPLE DON'T REALLY WANT TO
KNOW THE STORY OF THESE KIDS
BECAUSE IT'S HARD TO HEAR.
JUDY LAMBETH IS THE PRESIDENT
AND CEO OF MARYHURST WHICH IS
ONE OF THE FEW CENTERS IN THE
COUNTRY DEDICATED TO THE MOST
ABUSED AND DAMAGED BOYS AND
GIRLS.
THOSE WHOSE PROBLEMS WOULD KEEP
THEM BOUNCING FROM FOSTER HOME
TO FOSTER HOME.
HERE 600 CHILDREN A YEAR ARE
EACH SURROUNDED AND SUPPORTED BY
A TEAM OF SPECIALISTS.
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THEIR
STORIES, DON'T YOU JUST DESPAIR
ABOUT HUMAN BEINGS?
YEAH, THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
AND MOST THE WORLD, IT WOULD BE
HARD FOR THEM TO BELIEVE THAT
THIS HAPPENS TO CHILDREN AND
THAT SOMETIMES AT THE HANDS OF
THEIR PARENTS.
BUT IN THE CONTEXT OF WHO -- OF
MEETING THEM AND SEEING THEM,
YOU SEE THE HOPE.
HOPE FOR SUMMER.
IN ART CLASS, COUNSELORS HELP
HER MAKE A TEDDY BEAR OF
PAPIER-MACHE.
THEN SHE HEAD BACK TO HER ROOM
TO BATTLE WITH THESE DEMONS.
I GET MAD, ANGRY, SAD.
FRUSTRATED.
BUT THEN ALL OF A SUDDEN,
SHE'S AN 11-YEAR-OLD KID WITH A
DISTRACTION.
YOU HAVE LONG EYELASHES JUST
LIKE ME.
YOU HAVE GORGEOUS EYELASHES.
YOU REALLY DO.
ARE THEY FAKE OR REAL?
THEY'RE FAKE.
THEY ARE?
UH-HUH.
I WANT TO SEE WHAT THEY LOOK
LIKE.
YOU CAN TAKE THEM OFF.
I DON'T KNOW HOW.
JUST GO PEEL THEM OFF.
EW!
GOOD MORNING, IT'S MISS AMERICA.
WELL, SORT OF LIKE THAT.
YEAH.
NIGHT FALLS AND SUMMER
PREPARES TO GO TO SLEEP.
I LIKE SLEEPING ON THE FLOOR.
I TURN ON THE MUSIC.
SHE LIKES MUSIC WHEN SHE
SLEEPS, HER FAVORITE LULLABY
SHE'S GOING TO SEE HER MOM
AND DAD.
SHE STARTS CRYING.
THE FIRST TIME SHE PRAYS FOR
HELP AND THE LORD TAKES THE
WHEEL.
* JESUS TAKE THE WHEEL *
SUMMER HAS MEMORIES OF WHAT
WAS DONE TO HER IN THE DARK.
SHE SLEEPS ON THE FLOOR WHERE
THE LIGHT SEEPS IN UNDER THE
DOOR.
AND FOR TONIGHT, NO ONE CAN
SNEAK IN AND HURT HER.
GOOD NIGHT, SUMMER.
GOOD NIGHT.
NICE MEETING YOU.
YOU TOO.
* SAVE ME FROM THIS ROAD I'M ON
JESUS TAKE THE WHEEL *
LATER, A DRAMATIC DEVELOPMENT
FOR SUMMER.
AND BEFORE TONIGHT IS OVER, WE
WILL FIND HER BIOLOGICAL MOTHER.
BUT AFTER THIS NEXT BREAK,
CHILDREN WHO RAISE THESE
QUESTIONS, HOW MANY CHANCES DO
YOU GIVE A PARENT TO CHANGE?
ESPECIALLY YOU CAN TAKE THE
CHILDREN AWAY BUT YOU CAN'T TAKE
AWAY THEIR LOVE.
THIS IS WHITNEY.
I MET HER AT THE LITTLE
MARYHURST STORE WHERE A FORMER
FOSTER CHILD HAS A PICTURE OP
THE WALL.
DO YOU HAVE ANY IDEA WHO SHE
WAS?
NO IDEA.
IT'S MARILYN MONROE.
SHE HAD A TOUGH CHILDHOOD, YOU
KNOW.
SHE HAD A REALLY TOUGH TIME.
I THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE DID.
PEOPLE LIKE 14-YEAR-OLD
WHITNEY, WHO HAS LIVED THE
FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM OF AMERICAN
FOSTER CARE.
LIKE THEY WOULD NAIL MY
WINDOW DOWN, AND I WOULD TRY TO
JUMP OFF THE ROOF.
BECAUSE I FEEL LIKE NOBODY
WANTED ME.
DAMAGED KIDS ACTING OUT, AND
FOSTER PARENTS WHO DON'T HAVE TO
KEEP THEM, SO THE KIDS WERE
OFTEN SENT FROM HOME TO HOME,
SCHOOL TO SCHOOL.
WHITNEY TO FIVE FOSTER CARE
PLACEMENTS WHILE SHE WAITS FOR A
MOM WHO KEEPS GOING ON AND OFF
COCAINE AND OTHER DRUGS.
WHITNEY HAS EVEN CUT HERSELF,
CERTAIN SHE'S RESPONSIBLE FOR
HER MOTHER'S TROUBLE.
IT WAS MY DECISION TO SKIP
SCHOOL.
I CAN BE A VERY SWEET PERSON,
AND I CAN BE A REALLY MEAN
PERSON.
BUT MOSTLY IT'S ALL SWEET.
SHE'S INCREDIBLY ATTACHED TO
HER MOM AND A LOT OF IT IS
BECAUSE IN SOME WAYS SHE'S HAD
TO PARENT HER MOM.
THEN ONE DAY, WHITNEY LEARNS
THAT HER MOTHER IS NOW IN JAIL,
AND SHE'LL GET A CHANCE TO SEE
HER FOR THE FIRST TIME IN EIGHT
MONTHS.
YOU LOOK SO WONDERFUL.
HI.
IN THE FACE OF A LITTLE GIRL,
SO MUCH YEARNING.
I'LL BE GOING TO MY DRUG
PLACE, DRUG REHAB, AND THEN
AFTER THAT, I'LL BE OUT.
WE CAN BE TOGETHER.
IT'S LIKE STARTING ALL OVER
AGAIN, ANEW.
WE'RE GONNA LOOK DIFFERENT.
WE'RE GONNA ACT DIFFERENT.
WE'RE GONNA BE HAPPY.
AND SAFE AND DRUG-FREE.
AND WHITNEY BELIEVES HER ONE
MORE TIME.
BY THE WAY, HER MOTHER IS ALSO A
PRODUCT OF FOSTER CARE.
SAY YOUR PRAYERS EVERY NIGHT.
AND YOU'RE LOOKING MORE LIKE ME
EVERY DAY.
OKAY.
I LOVE YOU.
ONE, TWO, THREE.
LOVE YOU.
LATER.
AS THE GATES SLAM SHUT,
WHITNEY HEADS OFF TO HER SIXTH
FOSTER CARE HOME TO WAIT ONCE
MORE.
BY THE WAY, STUDIES HAVE SHOWN
AMONG FOSTER KIDS, POSTTRAUMATIC
STRESS IS TWICE THAT OF WAR
VETERANS, 52% END UP WITH MENTAL
HEALTH PROBLEMS.
ACROSS THE COUNTRY IN SALEM,
OREGON, ANOTHER CHILD WITH A
STRANGE HISTORY.
I JUST WANT TO GET BACK TO
CLEANING.
HE IS A 3-YEAR-OLD WITH
ANOTHER MOTHER A METH
AMPHETAMINE ADDICT AND ANOTHER
SET OF PROMISES.
I'M NOT GOING TO TOUCH THAT
[ BLEEP ] EVER AGAIN.
FATHER FORGIVE ME.
AND I PROMISE TO THE LORD THAT
I'LL NEVER TOUCH THAT STUFF
AGAIN, AND I'LL GET HELP.
SHE'S ALREADY HAD THREE
CHILDREN TAKEN AWAY.
THIS IS HER FOURth.
HE WOULD LICK WATER UP OFF
THE FLOOR.
I THOUGHT THIS POOR BABY HAS
BEEN LEFT ALONE WITH AN ANIMAL.
THIS IS THE FOSTER MOTHER WHO
SAYS WHEN SHE GOT THE
3-YEAR-OLD, HE WOULD ROLL ON HIS
BACK AND PANT.
THE MOTHER DENIES IT, BUT WAS
HIS REAL CARE-TAKER THE DOG
WALKING AROUND THE LIVING ROOM?
AND HE KEST DOING ALL THESE
AUGUST DA-LIKE BEHAVIORS.
-- DOING ALL THESE DOG-LIKE
BEHAVIORS.
I HANDED HIM A SPOON AND HE HAD
NO CLUE.
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT, I'D
GET UP, AND HE'D BE SITTING ON
THE FRONT PORCH LIKE A DOG AND
HE'D WATCH THE TRAFFIC GO BY.
SO HOW MANY TRANCES WOULD
YOU -- CHANCES WOULD YOU GIVE
THIS CHILD'S PARENT?
THIS IS JUDGE ABERNATHY WHO'S
SEEN TOO MANY BEFORE AND AFTER
FACES OF METHAMPHETAMINE USERS
AND SHE'S SEEN THE HOUSES IN
WHICH SOME OF THE PARENTS LIVE
WITH THEIR KIDS.
THEN THERE'S USUALLY HUMAN
POOP ON THE FLOOR.
NOTHING TO EAT.
THERE IS DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
IT IS A HELL HOLE.
SO EVEN THOUGH FEDERAL LAW
GIVES A PARENT AT LEAST 15
MONTHS TO STRAIGHTEN UP AND GET
BACK A CHILD, OREGON NOW HAS A
LAW THAT ALLOWS TERMINATION OF
PARENTAL RATES TO BEGIN RIGHT
AWAY, NO EXTRA CHANCES IN THE
WORST OF THE METH HOUSES.
I ALWAYS JUST REMIND PEOPLE,
REMEMBER WHAT IT WAS LIKE WHEN
YOU WERE 7 YEARS OLD.
WHERE WOULD YOU GO?
WHO DO YOU TALK TO?
YOU ALWAYS LOVE YOUR MOMMY,
ALWAYS LOVE YOUR DADDY, OR YOU
KNOW YOU'RE SUPPOSED TO.
PROSECUTOR AMA DWEEMO SAYS
THE CONNECTION TO BIOLOGICAL
PARENTS IS SO POWERFUL, STUDIES
SHOW THE MOST SUCCESSFUL FOSTER
CARE OF ALL MAY BE THE
PIONEERING KIND WE FOUND IN
LOUISVILLE, KENTUCKY.
I'M DIANE.
I'M HOWARD.
IT'S REALLY NICE TO MEET YOU.
IT'S NICE TO MEET YOU TOO.
HOWARD DENZ, A SINGLE FATHER
OF THREE BOYS WHO ONCE SEEMED AN
ABUSIVE ALCOHOLIC WHO HIT HIS
DID KIDS.
THEY WERE TAKEN AWAY.
BUT A PIR KNEEING PROGRAM,
FAMILY GROUP DECISION-MAKING,
SAW TO IT FIRST THAT THE
CHILDREN WERE IN FOSTER HOME IN
THE NEIGHBORHOOD THEY KNEW.
A CHURCH COMMUNITY, AND NEAR
ENOUGH TO HOWARD THAT IF HE
STAYED SOBER, HE COULD SEE THEM
ALL THE TIME.
TAKE NOTE OF THOSE FEELINGS
THAT YOU HAVE.
BOTH HOWARD AND HIS KIDS WERE
SURROUNDED BY HELPING HANDS,
COUNSELORS, THERAPISTS, A.A.
MEETINGS AND A DEVOTED SOCIAL
WORKER NAMED SKY TANG WHO
STARTED OUT --
VERY STERN.
BUT AFTER I STARTED SEEING THAT
SHE WAS ACTUALLY WORKING WITH ME
AND NOT AGAINST ME, THEN I
START, YOU KNOW, OPENING MY EYES
AND REALIZING, YOU KNOW, SHE WAS
THERE FOR ME.
TODAY HOWARD IS ONE YEAR AND
SIX MONTHS SOBER, HIS BOYS
THRIVING.
YOU LOVE THEM.
I LOVE MY BOYS, THAT'S RIGHT.
AND BY THE WAY, ALL THIS COST
NO MORE THAN THE $40,000 A YEAR
PER CHILD WE ALL PAY FOR
STANDARD FOSTER CARE.
WHAT'S THE BEST THING THEY'VE
SAID TO YOU SINCE THEY CAME
BACK?
I HEARD 'EM TELL ME THEY
LOVED ME, YOU KNOW.
I HEARD THAT.
GOOD MORNING.
IN THE MORNING, EVERYBODY SAYING
GOOD MORNING TO EACH OTHER.
AND SINCE WE MET WITH HIM IN
IT HIS TINY HOUSE, HOWARD HAS
NOW MOVED INTO A HOUSE WITH A
LAWN AND A FUTURE.
CALLING ALL ANGELS CONTINUES.
FIGHTER -- FIREFIGHTER OR A
POLICE OFFICER.
BECAUSE I WANT TO HELP PEOPLE.
* CALLING ALANGELS
CALLING ALL ANGELS *
HELPING PEOPLE, MAYBE FIGHT
CRIME OR SOMETHING.
I WANT TO BE AS COULD COSMETOLOGIST,
HOUSE DESIGNER, CLOTHING
OH, I WANT TO BE A BACKUP DANCER
FOR BRITNEY SPEARS.
I ALWAYS WANTED TO BE A
SUPERHERO.
I HAVEN'T CHANGED MY MIND YET
SINCE I WAS 5.
* HEAVINESS *
I WAS MEANT TO BE ABLE TO
HAVE A FAMILY TO CARE ABOUT ME
AND TAKE THE TIME TO SIT DOWN
WITH ME AND TALK TO ME ABOUT MY
ISSUES.
TO SEE MY DAD AGAIN.
A GOOD HOME AND THAT I WOULD
GET ADOPTED AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
I HAVE NO FAMILY.
NOBODY'S THERE TO SUPPORT ME.
YOU KNOW, LIFE'S REAL BAD.
SOME OTHER KIDS DON'T KNOW
WHAT IT'S LIKE, AND THEY JUST
THINK THAT YOUR LIFE IS NORMAL.
* 'CAUSE WE'RE NOT SURE HOW
THIS GOES *
IF YOU COULD WAVE A MAGIC
WAND AND HAVE ONE THING
TOMORROW, WHAT WOULD HELP THE
MOST FOR THESE GIRLS?
THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
I WOULD WANT FOR ALL OF OUR
GIRLS, OUR KIDS, TO HAVE ONE
ADULT IN THEIR LIFE THAT THEY
CAN COUNT ON THE REST OF THEIR
LIVES.
ADULTS LIKE ROBERT AND
CAROLYN HEMMING, WHO LOOKED
THROUGH A PICTURE BOOK OF FOSTER
CARE KIDS AND ADOPTED THREE
SIBLINGS.
THE PETITIONS ARE GRANTED,
AND THE CHILDREN ARE NOW ADOPTED
BY THE PETITIONERS, ROBERT AND
CAROLYN HEMMING.
EACH OF YOU BELONGS TO EACH
OTHER FOREVER AND EVER AND EVER.
* CALLING ALL ANGELS *
[ APPLAUSE ]
JUDGE MICHAEL NASH, HEAD OF
THE LOS ANGELES COUNTY JUVENILE
COURT.
IT IS ORDERED THAT ELIJAH
BLUE BOREK, WHO IS NOW GATHERED
UP ALL THE TEDDY BEARS.
[ LAUGHTER ]
IS DECLARED TO BE THE CHILD OF
STEVEN DAVID BOREK AND TARA JO
BOREK.
LUCKY LITTLE CHILDREN, NOT SO
LUCKY, AMANDA, WHO WAS ONCE A
HOPEFUL LITTLE KID, TOO.
I ALWAYS WANTED LIKE TO LIVE
OUT IN THE COUNTRY WITH DOGS AND
FISH THAT WE COULD TAKE CARE OF
IN A LITTLE POND AND PARENTS
THAT WE COULD LIKE GO OUT AND
SIT IN THE YARD ON A SWING WITH
MY MOM.
THIS IS LIKE THE LAST TIME I
EVER SAW MY DAD.
HER FATHER DIED OF ALCOHOL
POISONING.
HER MOTHER ON DRUGS.
SHE BOUNCED AROUND TO 19
DIFFERENT FOSTER CARE
PLACEMENTS.
AMANDA IS AT MARYHURST, AND AT
AGE 15, STUDIES SHOW HER CHANCE
OF ADOPTION HAS FALLEN TO LESS
THAN 10%.
I WAS JEALOUS.
I ENVIED ALL OF MY FRIENDS,
BECAUSE THEY HAD PARENTS AND I
DIDN'T.
AMANDA WAS 11 WHEN RELATIVES
INTRODUCED HER TO DRUGS AND
ALCOHOL MASKING THE PAIN,
CREATING A CRAVING.
A FAMILY FRIEND HAS INVITED HER
TO VISIT.
AMANDA CALLS TO SAY, COULD YOU
HIDE THE PAINKILLERS?
I JUST WANT TO ASK YOU IF YOU
CAN KEEP THEM OUT OF MY SIGHT,
KEEP THEM LOCKED UP.
I CAN DO THAT.
IT WOULD HELP A LOT.
BECAUSE IT'S GONNA BE HARD.
HONEY, YOU KNOW I KNOW WHAT
YOU'VE BEEN THROUGH.
AND I SURE WOULDN'T PUT
TEMPTATION IN FRONT OF YOU.
AND I KNOW SHE NEEDS A HOME SO
BAD.
SHE NEEDS FAMILY.
SHE'S HAD A ROUGH LIFE.
BUT WE KEPT SEEING GIRLS LIKE
AMANDA CAREEN BETWEEN SUCCESS
AND THEN SELF-DESTRUCTION.
THIS IS THE KIND OF STUFF
THAT YOU DON'T GO TO MARYHURST
FOR, YOU GO TO JAIL.
SHE ADMITS TO HER TRUSTED
COUNSELOR EMILY THAT SHE STOLE A
BELLY RING.
THEN SHE SOBS WITH REGRET.
IN A NEIGHBORING DOOR AT
MARYHURST, 13-YEAR-OLD DESTINY,
WHO'S BEEN IN 18 PLACEMENTS,
TRIES TO JUMP OFF A BALCONY.
[ SCREAMS ]
THEN A HALF-HOUR LATER, SHE'S
BACK TO NORMAL.
MISTY, AGE 15, HORRIBLY ABUSED
AND BATTERED.
I CAN'T STOP ITCHING.
WHAT MAKES MISTY FEEL BETTER?
I DON'T KNOW.
AN HOUR AFTER HER EXPLOSION,
SHE CALMLY ANALYZES HERSELF.
I'M A TROUBLED CHILD.
I'M WORKING ON MY COMMUNICATION
SKILLS.
AND IS THERE ANYONE OUT THERE
WHO WILL HELP 17-YEAR-OLD
SHERONIKA TRYING DESPERATELY TO
MAKE HERSELF LOOK GOOD BEFORE
SHE HAS TO HEAD OUT ALONE INTO A
TOUGH WORLD.
I'M DYING.
IT'S KILLING MY BACK.
I USED TO BE LIKE 190 POUNDS
UNTIL I GOT PUT IN PLACEMENTS.
THEN I STARTED GAINING WEIGHT.
AND NOW I WEIGH LIKE 300 POUNDS.
HER MOTHER IS ON DRUGS.
HER GRANDMOTHER SCHIZOPHRENIC.
SHE'S BEEN HOSPITALIZED SIX
TIMES OVER THE LAST THREE YEARS
FOR SUICIDE THREATS AND FOR
AGGRESSION.
THE CHILDREN THAT I FEEL THE
MOST FOR ARE THOSE WHO ARE AGING
OUT OF THE SYSTEM, AND EVEN
THOUGH THEY'VE GOT AN LOT OF
HELP, IT'S LIKE PUTTING A
5-YEAR-OLD IN THE MEDIAN OF A
FREEWAY DURING TRAFFIC TIME AND
SAYING, MAKE YOUR WAY ACROSS
WITHOUT GETTING HIT.
AND THEY CAN'T DO IT.
THOSE ARE THE CHILDREN THAT I
PRAY THE MOST FOR.
BUT MARYHURST AND OTHER
SUCCESSFUL PROGRAMS NEED FUNDING
FOR THESE KIDS.
AND THEY ALSO NEED FOSTER AND
ADOPTIVE FAMILIES READY TO TAKE
A CHANCE.
WE KNOW THAT IT IS A LOT
EASIER TO RAISE STRONG
PRODUCTIVE CHILDREN THAN IT IS
TO FIX BROKEN ADULTS.
WILLIAM BELL OF THE CASEY
FAMILY PROGRAM SAYS FOSTER CARE
AS IT NOW EXISTS CREATES 30% OF
THE HOMELESS IN AMERICA, A
QUARTER OF THOSE IN PRISON, AND
TENS OF THOUSANDS MORE OF THESE
KIDS ARE ON THE WAY.
WE'VE GOT TO DO SOMETHING
DIFFERENT.
WE CAN DO SOMETHING DIFFERENT.
FOR INSTANCE, PROGRAMS LIKE
THOSE IN MARYHURST WHICH TRY TO
HELP ON THIS DAY FOR AMANDA.
SOMETIMES YOU LOOK SO SAD.
I WON'T SUCCEED IN ANYTHING
IF I DON'T STAY SOBER.
AT MARYHURST, AMANDA'S
COUNSELOR EMILY DECIDES TO SHARE
A SECRET ABOUT ANOTHER GIRL WHO
ONCE STRUGGLED WITH ADDICTION
AND FEAR IN THIS ROOM.
I WAS A RESIDENT HERE 18
YEARS AGO, AND I ACTUALLY LIVED
IN THIS PARTICULAR ROOM.
EMILY REVEALS TO AMEND, WHO
EMILY WAS IN THIS PICTURE, A
FOSTER CARE GIRL SENT TO
MARYHURST.
ARE YOU STILL IN SHOCK?
A GIRL WHO CAME BACK TO HELP
OTHERS AND SAY, SOMEHOW YOU'LL
MAKE IT TOO.
THIS ISN'T A JOB FOR ME.
THIS IS A LOVE FOR ME.
IF SOMEBODY CARES ABOUT YOU WHEN
YOU'RE AT YOUR WORST, THAT'S FOR
ALL OF US, THEN WE KNOW WE'RE
LOVED.
* CALLING ALL ANGELS *
* WALK ME THROUGH THIS
DON'T LEAVE ME ALONE *
WE'RE BACK WITH SUMMER, ONE
OF THE YOUNGEST GIRLS EVER TO
ENTER MARYHURST.
YOU SHOULD KNOW TWO YEARS AGO,
SHE WAS ADOPTED BY THAT FOSTER
FAMILY, THE MEYERS.
SHE LIVED WITH THEM ON THEIR
FARM IN WESTERN KENTUCKY AND
TALKS ABOUT HOW MUCH SHE LOVES
HER ADOPTIVE MOM.
MOM IS CARING.
SHE'S NICE.
SHE'S A GOOD PERSON.
SUMMER TRIES HARD, WORKS FOR
PERFECT SCORES IN SCHOOL.
AND WHEN HER ADOPTIVE PARENTS,
THE MEYERS, WOULD VISIT HER, SHE
DOES WHAT SHE'S SUPPOSED TO DO
AND ONLY GIVES THE APPROPRIATE
HUG FOR SEXUALLY ABUSED KIDS.
IT'S CALLED A SIDE HUG.
IT'S JUST A SAFER KIND OF
HUG.
SO YOU JUST --
YEAH, JUST A HUG LIKE THIS.
BECAUSE A FRONTAL HUG, THERE'S
MORE CONTACT.
MORE COMPLICATED?
BACK WITH ME, SOUMER HOPES ONLY
TO GO HOME AND HAVE A SIMPLE
FUTURE.
SO YOU THINK YOU CAN DO
ANYTHING YOU WANT TO DO IN YOUR
LIFE?
NO, JUST WORK AT WAL-MART AND
GET SOME CANDY.
AND SUMMER IS SURE THAT HER
ADOPTIVE MOM CAN'T WAIT TO HAVE
HER BACK.
MY MOM'S FACE SHE WANTED ME TO
BE HOME WITH HER.
SO I CAN START A NEW LIFE.
SHE THINKS SHE IS GOING HOME.
THAT'S WHAT SHE'S EXPRESSED TO
ME.
WE'VE KNOWN FOR SEVERAL
HAPPEN.
SALLY AND HER HUSBAND, WAYNE,
SAY THAT SUMMER'S PROBLEMS, THAT
INAPPROPRIATE TOUCHING BECAUSE
SHE WAS SEXUALLY ABUSED ARE JUST
TOO MUCH FOR THEM TO HANDLE.
THEY HAVE OTHER KIDS IN THE
HOUSE.
WE HAD TO WIND UP PUTTING
CAMERAS AND MOTION DETECTORS AND
THAT TYPE OF THING IN OUR HOME.
ALL IT TAKES IS ONE CHILD TO
MAKE ONE ACCUSATION, AND YOU'VE
RUINED A FAMILY.
THE MEYERS HAVE CONCERN ABOUT
WHETHER SUMMER WILL EVER BE ABLE
TO COME HOME AGAIN.
SO WE WATCH AS SUMMER COMES INTO
THE ROOM WITH A PRESENT FOR HER
ADOPTIVE MOM.
SOMETHING I MADE FOR YOU.
UNAWARE THAT SHE'S ABOUT TO
HEAR CRUSHING NEWS.
SUMMER, DO YOU HAVE ANY
QUESTIONS FOR US TODAY?
YEAH.
OKAY.
I WAS WONDERING IF WE COULD
LIKE START REQUESTING SOME HOME
PASSES.
WE'RE GOING TO PUT THAT ON
HOLD FOR A MINUTE.
OR?
YOUR SCHOOL REPORTS ARE
EXCELLENT.
BUT SUMMER IS NOT FOOLED BY
THE COMPLIMENTS.
YOU CAN SEE IT IN HER FACE.
SHE CAN SENSE EVEN BEFORE THE
WORDS HER LIFE IS ABOUT TO
UNRAVEL.
AGAIN.
SO WHAT WE'RE GONNA DO IS
YOU'RE GONNA STAY HERE ANOTHER
THREE MONTHS UNTIL WE DECIDE
WHAT CAN BE DONE.
NO MORE FOSTER HOMES?
WELL, WE DON'T KNOW.
I WANT TO GO HOME.
BUT IT'S UNSAFE AT HOME.
WHY IS IT UNSAFE?
WHAT DO YOU DO?
ACT OUT.
UH-HUH.
IT'S THAT IMPULSE TOWARD
INAPPROPRIATE TOUCHING, THE
KIDS, THE MEN IN HER HOME.
IS IT SAFE FOR THEM TO BRING
YOU BACK HOME?
NO.
OKAY.i]
BUT I WANT TO GO HOME.
DO YOU HAVE ANY OTHER
QUESTIONS OR ANYTHING FOR US?
OKAY.
BACK OUTSIDE, SUMMER LOOKS
FOR COMFORT AS COMFORT FADES.
TAKE ONE DAY AT A TIME, OKAY?
OKAY?
LOOK OVER THERE.
HMM?
LOOK OVER WHERE?
THE YELLOW FLOWERS.
MM-HMM.
WE WERE CURIOUS ABOUT
SUMMER'S BIOLOGICAL MOTHER AND
WHAT SHE WOULD SAY ABOUT THE
DAMAGE DONE IN SUMMER'S YOUNG
LIFE.
[ DOG BARKING ]
WE FOUND HER, NOT FAR FROM
MARYHURST, SUMMER'S BIOLOGICAL
MOM, SHOWING THE TOYS FROM HER
KIDS AND DENYING THAT SHE
NEGLECTED THEM.
AS FAR AS THE SEXUAL ABUSE
PART OF IT, I DON'T KNOW WHERE
IT'S COMING FROM.
TOUCHED SUMMER, IT HAS TO BE
SINCE THEY TOOK HER AWAY FROM
ME.
AND WHAT ABOUT THE DRUGS?
AND I'M NOT GONNA LIE TO YOU
JUST BECAUSE I'M ON CAMERA.
I GOT HOOKED ON DRUGS PRETTY
BAD.
METHAMPHETAMINES WAS ONE OF THE
MAJOR THINGS I GOT HOOKED ON.
AND IT WAS BAD.
AND DESPITE WHAT SUMMER HAS
SAID ABOUT THE HOME AND SUMMER'S
STRUGGLES, THE BIOLOGICAL MOTHER
SAYS SHE'D LIKE A CHANCE TO BE
HER MOM AGAIN.
I'D DO ANYTHING IN THE WORLD
JUST TO BE ABLE TO GET THEM
BACK.
AND BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU, WE
THOUGHT WE'D TELL YOU WHAT HAS
HAPPENED TO SOME OF THE KIDS YOU
MET HERE TONIGHT.
MANY OF THEM STILL PRAYING FOR
SOMEBODY TO LOVE WHO WILL LOVE
THEM BACK.
I WANT THEM TO KNOW THAT I'M
A REALLY GOOD PERSON, AND I'M
EASY TO GET ALONG WITH.
MY IDEA OF A FAMILY IS A
MOTHER AND A FATHER, A
STEPFATHER, WHATEVER, THAT CARES
FOR YOU AND LOVES YOU AND A
BROTHER AND SISTER THAT WANT TO
SEE YOU EVERY DAY.
I HOPE TO BE ADOPTED SO THAT
I CAN BECOME LIKE A CHEERLEADER,
SOCIAL WORKER, SOMEONE WHO CAN
ACHIEVE IN HERE LIFE AND NOT BE
THE PERSON WHO JUST DOES DRUGS
AND SITS AROUND ALL THE TIME.
AND SUMMER STILL WAITING FOR
WORD ON HER FUTURE.
**
BUT WE HAVE GOOD NEWS, TOO.
THAT 3-YEAR-OLD WHO SEEMED TO
HAVE LEARNED BEHAVIOR FROM THE
FAMILY DOG HIS FOSTER MOTHER
SAYS HE'S THRIVING.
I WISH PEOPLE REALIZE WHEN
THEY GET THESE CHILDREN AND THEY
START SHOWING THEM STRUCTURE,
THEY START SHOWING THEM LOVE,
THE CHANCES OF THE LONG-TERM
DISABILITIES REALLY LESSENS.
IT REALLY DOES.
AND WHAT AND ISMAEL?
HE WAS ADOPTED.
I'M HEALTHIER, HAPPIER.
IT'S LIKE A NEW START.
SO WAS TIFFANY.
AND DO YOU RECOGNIZE THIS LITTLE
FACE?
LOOK AT ME.
I STILL TURNED OUT GREAT.
LITTLE JAMES, ADOPTED BY GAY
PARENTS, TWO DADS.
I DIDN'T CARE THAT I HAD TWO
DADS.
I JUST CARED THAT THEY LOVED ME.
THAT'S THE SAME JAMES YOU SAW
HERE TONIGHT.
RAY AND MIKE ARE VERY, VERY
LOVING PARENTS.
AND THEY'VE HELPED ME A LOT.
A TESTAMENT TO WHAT LOVE CAN
DO FOUR YEARS LATER.
AFTER A COUPLE OF YEARS, I
SAID, HEY, MAYBE THESE PEOPLE
WON'T GIVE UP ON ME.
* LIGHTS WILL GUIDE YOU HOME *
* AND MAGIC BONES *
* AND I WILL TRY TO FIX YOU *
SO "PRIMETIME" EVENS BUT THE
CALL TO ACTION CONTINUES
TOMORROW ON "GOOD MORNING
AMERICA," "WORLD NEWS TONIGHT"
AND "20/20."
AND IF YOU WANT TO FIND OUT MORE
ABOUT THESE CHILDREN OR HOW YOU
CAN FOSTER OR ADOPT, GO TO OUR
WEB SITE ABCNEWS.COM.
LATER TONIGHT ON "NIGHTLINE,"
HAPPENS TO FOSTER KIDS WHO AGE
OUT OF THE SYSTEM?
I'M DIANE SAWYER.
FOR ALL OF US AT ABC NEWS AND
"PRIMETIME," GOOD NIGHT.
THEY NEED PARENTS TO CARE FOR
THEM.
* CALLING ALL ANGELS *
SOMEWHERE OUT THERE, IS THERE
A CHILD WAITING FOR YOU?
THAT'S THE QUESTION ABC NEWS HAS
BEEN ASKING THIS WEEK IN OUR
SERIES ON FOSTER CARE, CALLED A
CALL TO ACTION, SAVING THE
CHILDREN.
THESE ARE AMERICA'S FORGOTTEN
KIDS, OLDER CHILDREN WHOSE
CHANCES OF BEING ADOPTED FALL
DRAMATICALLY WITH EVERY NEW
BIRTHDAY.
FAMILIES NOT WILLING TO GIVE
THEM A HOME AND A CHANCE AT
HAPPINESS, BECAUSE THEY'RE TOO
OLD.
NOW THOUGH, THAT PICTURE IS
CHANGING.
THANKS TO ONE PHOTOGRAPHER'S
VISION, POTENTIAL PARENTS ARE
BEGINNING TO SEE THESE CHILDREN
IN A WHOLE NEW LIGHT.
HERE'S ABC'S BOB BROWN.
SOMETIMES A LENS SEES THINGS
PEOPLE DON'T.
SOMETIMES IT SEES THE SUBTLE
SPLENDOR IN LANDSCAPES THAT
WOULD HAVE VANISHED IN A SECOND
FROM A CAR WINDOW.
SOMETIMES IT SEES POSSIBILITIES
THAT OTHERWISE MIGHT HAVE GONE
UNNOTICED.
SHE DID NOT SHOW THAT SIDE OF
HERSELF TO ME, UNTIL REALLY THE
SECOND THAT I TOOK THAT ONE
PICTURE.
BUT I CHOSE THAT ONE, BECAUSE
IT SHOWED HER INNER STRENGTH,
AND HER DIGINITY.
AND JUST A REALLY STRONG
CHARACTER, THAT YOU SENSED IN
HER RIGHT AWAY.
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
HAVE NOW HAD THE EXPERIENCE THAT
JACKIE HAD WHEN SHE LOOKED AT
THE PORTRAIT SHE TOOK OF FAYE, A
GIRL IN FOSTER CARE.
IN CITIES THROUGHOUT AMERICA,
ART GALLERIES AND PUBLIC SPACES
HAVE MOUNTED STUNNING
EXHIBITIONS OF CHILDREN'S
PORTRAITS TAKEN BY SOME OF THE
WORLD'S MOST FAMOUS AND BEST
PAID PHOTOGRAPHERS.
THEY'RE ALL WORKING FOR NOTHING
USING THEIR TALT ENTS TO BRING
OUT QUALITIES THAT OTHERWISE MAY
HAVE GONE UNDISCOVERED FOR
CHILDREN IN FOSTER CARE.
JACKIE WHO LIVES IN SANTA FE WAS
ONE OF THOSE PHOTOGRAPHERS.
IT SOFTENS YOU UP INSIDE, YOU
KNOW?
IT MAKES A SOFT PLACE INSIDE OF
YOU.
AND IT HUMBLES YOU, BECAUSE YOU
TAKE FOR GRANTED WHAT YOU HAVE.
THE PROJECT, WHICH HAS GAINED
SO MUCH MOMENTUM, THAT ITS
FOUNDER PREFERS TO DESCRIBE IT
AS A MOVEMENT, IS CALLED THE
HEART GALLERY.
THE IDEA ORIGINATED ONLY FIVE
YEARS AGO IN SANTA FE, WHERE A
LOCAL PHOTOGRAPHER SUGGESTED IT
TO DIANE GRANIDO OF THE MEXICO
YOUTH AND FAMILIES DEPARTMENT.
SPACE WAS DONATED BY THE GERALD
PETER'S GALLERY IN SANTA FE,
WHICH CONTINUES TO HOST
EXHIBITS.
BECAUSE OLDER CHILDREN ARE THE
MOST DIFFICULT TO PLACE WITH
ADOPTIVE FAMILIES, THEY ARE THE
FOCUS OF WHAT THE EXHIBIT'S ALL
ABOUT.
IMPROVING THE RATE OF ADOPTION
BY HUMANIZING THE CHILDREN.
WHAT KINDS OF PICTURES WERE
THE TYPICAL PICTURES BEFORE THIS
PROJECT CAME INTO BE?
THE PHOTOGRAPHS ARE THE KIND
THAT YOU MIGHT GET TAKEN AT
SCHOOL.
WHERE THE CHILD HAS HIS OR HER
HAIR, YOU KNOW, SLICKED BACK,
AND THEY'RE PROPPED IN FRONT OF
A FAKE BACK DROP.
IT DOESN'T EXPRESS THE
INDIVIDUALALITY OF THE CHILD AT
ALL.
THEY'RE ALMOST INTERCHANGEABLE.
IN THESE EXHIBITS, EVERY
PHOTO IS UNIQUE.
BUT THE REAL MAGIC HAPPENS
WHEN PEOPLE TAKE THE TIME TO
STOP AND LOOK INTO THE EYES OF
EACH CHILD, AND ACTUALLY APPLY
TO ADOPT THE CHILD, BECAUSE OF
THE CONNECTION THEY FELT WITH
THIS PORTRAIT OF THE CHILD.
THERE ARE MORE THAN 80 HEART
GALLERY ORGANIZATIONS IN 40
STATES, AND IN SOMEPLACES, THE
ADOPTION RATE AFTER AN EXHIBIT
IS MORE THAN DOUBLE THE
NATIONWIDE RATE OF ADOPTION FROM
FOSTER CARE.
IF YOU PUSH THIS BUTTON, THAT
STARTS RECORDING.
NAJLAH FEANNY IS A PHOTO
JOURNALIST WHO ASSEMBLED A WHO'S
WHO OF PHOTOGRAPHY FOR THE NEW
JERSEY HEART GALLERY.
I WAS STUNNED AT THE
EMOTIONAL LEVEL OF SOME OF THESE
CHILDREN, HAVING JUST MET A
PHOTOGRAPHER, AND AN HOUR LATER
SAYING, PLEASE DON'T LEAVE ME.
WOW.
ONE LITTLE GIRL SAID THIS IS
THE BEST DAY OF MY LIFE.
BILLY HAD BEEN IN FOSTER CARE
NEARLY TEN YEARS WHEN WE MET
HIM.
HE WOULD BE DELIGHTED TO BE
DISCOVERED.
I'D BE VERY, VERY, VERY
HAPPY.
I'D BE HAPPY MORE THAN ANYTHING.
BECAUSE I CAN FINALLY GO HOME,
AND I CAN FINALLY STAY PUT, AND
MAKE SOME FRIENDS THAT I CAN
ACTUALLY STAY WITH FOR A WHILE.
I'VE SEEN A LOT OF THINGS IN
LIFE THAT NOT MANY 13-YEAR-OLD
KIDS HAVE SEEN.
SUCH AS?
SUCH AS MY PARENTS FIGHTING A
LOT.
BEING SEPARATED FROM MY SISTERS.
YOU HAVE A TWIN?
UH-HUH.
BUT YOU DON'T LIVE WITH YOUR
TWIN?
HUH-UH.
AND IF HE SEES THIS, TELL HIM I
LOVE HIM.
I'VE BEEN AWAY FROM MY MOTHER
FOR FIVE YEARS NOW, AND I'VE
BEEN IN FOSTER CARE FOR A LONG
TIME.
KIND OF WORRIED ABOUT GETTING A
FAMILY AND HOW THEY'RE GOING TO
BE ABLE TO TREAT ME.
THE THING THAT CHANGED ME THE
MOST, IS TO SEE THESE KIDS
REALLY TRYING SO HARD TO FIND
PARENTS.
OPEN YOUR EYES JUST A LITTLE
BIT MORE.
MARTIN SCHOELLER IS A WORLD
FAMOUS PORTRAIT PHOTOGRAPHER.
NO FIGHTING HERE.
HIS RECENT SUBJECTS INCLUDE
ACADEMY AWARD WINNER, JAMIE
FOXX.
NOW HE'S SHOOTING COURTENEY AND
VINCENT, BROTHER AND SISTER.
AND HE HAD HIS WORK CUT OUT FOR.
MANY OF THESE KIDS DIDN'T SMILE
A LOT.
BUT SCHOELLER KNOWS THAT ONE OF
THE HOPED FOR RESULTS IS TO GET
SIBLINGS ADOPTED TOGETHER.
HE WANTS A PICTURE SHOWING THEIR
RELATIONSHIP.
I THINK IT TOOK ME ABOUT 20
MINUTES TO GET A LITTLE BIT OF A
SMILE OUT OF HIM.
THAT'S GREAT.
OKAY, LET'S TAKE YOUR JACKET
OFF.
ERICA BERGER SHOOTS
CELEBRITIES FOR "PEOPLE
MAGAZINE."
I THINK THE MOST IMPORTANT
THING FOR ME WHEN I WAS WORKING
WITH THEM IS TO TRY TO FIGURE
OUT VERY QUICKLY WHAT THEIR MOOD
WAS AND THEN GO WITH THAT.
ONE, TWO, THREE, GO!
AND DAVID BERGMAN, HE WENT
FOR ACTION PHOTOS.
HE WORKS FOR "SPORTS
ILLUSTRATED."
THAT'S G.
I TRY TO GET THEM JUST TO
PLAY.
OH MY GOD, THAT WAS AMAZING.
THEY KIND OF FORGET ABOUT THE
CAMERA, AND THE LIGHTS AND ALL
THE PEOPLE STANDING AROUND.
AND I CAN JUST CAPTURE THEM IN A
FUN MOMENT.
GO.
ISAIAH, THE SUBJECT OF THIS
BERGMAN PHOTOGRAPH HAS NOW BEEN
PLACED WITH A FAMILY.
NANASHKA ALSO FOUND A FAMILY.
AFTER THESE PHOTOS WERE
EXHIBITED IN NEW JERSEY, THE
STATE'S DIVISION OF IMRIEWGHT
AND FAMILY SERVICES SAID IT HAD
EXPERIENCED A 280% INCREASE IN
ADOPTION INQUIRIES FROM 800 TO
MORE THAN 3,000, COMPARED TO THE
SAME PERIOD THE YEAR BEFORE.
WILL YOU DO ONE MORE PICTURE?
NICE.
FAYE WAS 10 YEARS OLD, AND
HAD BEEN IN FIVE FOSTER HOMES IN
NEW MEXICO WHEN JACKIE WAS
RECRUITED TO PHOTOGRAPH HER FOR
THE HEART GALLERY.
FAYE'S EXPERIENCE HAD GIVEN HER
AN ACTIVE IMAGINATION AS A KIND
OF PROTECTIVE DEVICE.
SHE, A LOT OF THE TIME DIDN'T
HAVE SOMEONE ELSE TO TAKE CARE
OF HER.
WHENEVER FAYE HAD A BAD
CREAM, SHE TOLD ME.
SHE WOULD JUST GO BACK AND DREAM
IT OVER AGAIN.
WELL, I USUALLY USE IT TO
MAKE UP THINGS, LIKE IF
SOMETHING'S NOT GOING RIGHT, I
CAN JUST LIKE GO BACK, AND INTO
MY IMAGINATION, AND MAKE IT LOOK
BETTER.
JACKIE AND HER HUSBAND,
COURTENEY HAVE A TEENAGE SON,
JACKSON.
THOUGH THEY HAD DISCUSSED
ADOPTING A CHILD, NOTHING HAD
COME OF IT.
UNTIL THE DAY JACKIE
PHOTOGRAPHED FAYE, AND HAD TEARS
IN HER EYES ON THE DRIVE HOME.
AND I THINK RIGHT THEN
SOMETHING CHANGED INSIDE OF ME,
YOU KNOW?
I KNEW.
TODAY, THE PORTRAIT OF FAYE
THAT HUNG IN THE SANTA FE HEART
GALLERY EXHIBIT, HANGS IN HER
OWN ROOM, IN THE MA DAY HOUSE.
AND IN NOVEMBER OF 2005, THE
ENTIRE FAMILY, FAYE NOW
INCLUDED, TOOK A CONTRIBUTE TO
WASHINGTON FOR A NATIONAL EVENT
TO PROMOTE THE HEART GALLERY.
JACKIE MATAY, AND HER HUSBAND
WOUND UP ADOPTING FAYE.
WHEN I PHOTOGRAPHED FAYE, IT
WAS OBVIOUSLY A LIFE CHANGING
MOMENT FOR ME.
AS THIS MOVEMENT HAS SPREAD,
SO HAVE THE RESULTS.
DIANE GRANITO ESTIMATES THAT BY
THE END OF 2006, 1,000 CHILDREN
WILL BE PLACED WITH FAMILIES,
DIRECTLY AS A RESULT OF THE
HEART GALLERY EXHIBITS, AND THE
PHOTOGRAPHS THAT HAVE BEEN
MOUNDED IN MORE THAN 80 SHOWS.
NO ONE PRETENDS SUCH ADOPTIONS
ARE EASY, ESPECIALLY WITH OLDER
CHILDREN.
PARENTS AND CHILD WIND UP
TESTING EACH OTHER THROUGH A
PERIOD OF ADJUSTMENT.
FOR THE CHILD, ONE KEY TO
ADJUSTING IS COME TO GO BELIEVE
SHE WON'T BE MOVED AGAIN.
THAT SHE HAS A FAMILY FOR LIFE.
SINCE IT'S BEEN ALMOST THREE
YEARS NOW, IT'S EASIER TO SEE
HOW TIME CHANGES THINGS, AND TO
JUST SEE THAT SHE HAS THAT
BELIEF NOW, GROWING IN HER, THAT
WELL, I AM HERE.
THIS IS MY HOME.
I CAN LAY DOWN ON THE COUCH, AND
I CAN PLAY WITH THE DOG, AND I
CAN HAVE A WARM PLACE TO SLEEP.
AND I'LL ALWAYS WAKE UP TO
THE SAME PLACE, AND IN MY BED.
AND PHOTOGRAPHERS, THROUGH
THEIR LENSES HAVE SEEN AND
CAPTURED PICTURES THAT HAD SO
SO
OFTEN ESCAPED THE REST OF US, OF
CHILDREN WHO WERE NO LONGER
VIEWED AS WARDS OF THE STATE,
BUT AS WORKS OF ART, AND MORE
AND MORE FREQUENTLY, AS MEMBERS
OF A FAMILY.
I THINK I GOT EVERYTHING I
WANT.
AND WHAT WAS THAT?
A LOVING FAMILY.
BUT MOST OF THE CHILDREN WE
SAW BEING PHOTOGRAPHED,
INCLUDING BILLY, WHO WILL SOON
TURN 15, ARE STILL WAITING.
NATIONWIDE, OUT OF THE HALF
MILLION CHILDREN IN FOSTER CARE,
THERE ARE NEARLY 118,000
AVAILABLE FOR ADOPTION.
AND THERE IS A TERM FOR THOSE
WHO NEVER FIND A FAMILY, IT'S
CALLED AGING OUT.
CHILDREN WHO AREN'T ADOPTED BY
THE AGE OF 18 ARE SIMPLY
RELEASED INTO THE WORLD TO DO
THE BEST THEY CAN.
WHAT KIND OF FAMILY WOULD YOU
LIKE, IF A FAMILY WERE AADOPT
YOU?
A FAMILY THAT'S LIKE --
THAT'S NOT LIKE ALWAYS FIGHTING
EVERY DAY.
THAT SPENDS TIMES WITH THE KIDS
SOMETIMES.
THEY HAVE SEEN CHILDREN WHO
ARE JUST WAITING, WAITING.
VERY
AFTER BEING LEFT FOR DEATH.
THE INSIDE STORY FROM THE
TOUGHEST PLACE ON EARTH.
CHILDREN ON THE BRINK --
COULD THIS LITTLE GIRL'S LIFE
COULD HAVE BEEN
CALORIES.
CAN AMERICANS EXPANDING
WAISTLINES BE STOPPED.
IT'S A SIGN OF THE TIMES.
THIS WEEK, ABC NEWS HAS BEEN
AIRING A SERIES OF STARTLING
REPORTS ON THE COUNTRY'S DEEPLY
TROUBLING FOSTER CARE SYSTEM.
TONIGHT WE BRING YOU EVIDENCE
CAUGHT ON TAPE ON WHAT CAN
HAPPEN WHEN THE SYSTEM FAILS TO
HELP A CHILD.
A RARE INSIDE LOOK OF A SOCIAL
WORKER MAKING THE MOST HEART
WRENCHING DECISION OF ALL.
ABC'S DIANE SAWYER'S A CALL TO
ACTION, SAVING OUR CHILDREN.
TELL HIM I GOT HIS MESSAGE.
I JUST NEED THE PHONE NUMBERS
FOR THE FOSTER PARENTS
Reporter: SKY, ONE OF THE
NEARLY 2,000 FAMILY SOCIAL
WORKERS.
I HAVE 14 MINUTES TO GET
SOMEWHERE ELSE.
ZMRR AT 33 SHE MAKES LIFE AND
DEATH DECISIONS EVERY DAY.
I HAVE A LIST OF
RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE COURT.
ALL RIGHT I'LL BE BACK.
Reporter: TODAY, AN ANXIOUS
VISIT TO FAMILY.
THE KIDS HAVE BEEN MISSING
SCHOOL.
ARE THEY ALL RIGHT?
I'M LITTLE STRESSED.
THERE ARE KIDS IN THERE.
Reporter: WORRIED SHE MOVES
TO BACK OF THE HOUSE, TO THE
FRONT.
IN THE FREEZING COLD.
THEN THE FATHER OF ONE THE
CHILDREN APPEARS.
SKY HAS 19 OPEN CASES.
BELIEVE IT OR NOT, SHE'S LUCKY.
AVERAGE NUMBER FOR A SOCIAL
WORKER IN AMERICA, IS 30.
SOME WORKERS HAVE AN IMPOSSIBLE
80 FAMILIES AT TIME.
A QUARTER OF THESE WORKERS QUIT
EVERY YEAR.
Reporter: YOU MUST SPEND YOUR
LIFE IN THIS CAR.
WE DO A LOT OF OFFICE WORK.
WE MUST SEE THE PARENTS ONE TIME
A MONTH, CHILDREN ONE TIME PER
MONTH.
I'M VERY HONEST, VERY DIRECT.
SUCCESSES ARE WHAT KEEPS ME
GOING, DAY IN AND DAY OUT.
BECAUSE I BELIEVE IN PEOPLE.
Reporter: SHE WORKED
ALONGSIDE HOWARD AND HI KIDS TO
CREATE A FAMILY AGAIN.
THERE'S RHONDA, WHO TURNED HER
LIFE AROUND, AFTER TEN YEARS OF
ADDICTION AND GOT HER KIDS BACK,
TOO.
LOVE HER.
I'M PROUD OF YOU.
AS NIGHT FALLS, SKY FACES
WHAT HE DREADS THE MOST, GOING
BACK TO THE HOME WHERE SHE
KNOCKED AND KNOCKED A MONTH
EARLIER.
SKY HAS TO ENFORCE A COURT ORDER
TO TAKE THE CHILDREN AWAY TO
FOSTER CARE.
THIS SHE ABSOLUTELY THE WORST
PART OF MY JOB.
THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT TAKING A
CHILD FROM THEIR MOTHER, THAT
JUST KIND OF SET -- IT'S OKAY TO
BE SAD.
Reporter: DESPITE WARNINGS
THE KIDS AREN'T SENT TO SCHOOL,
IN THE BACKSEAT OF THIS CAR,
THEY'RE JUST TINY FRIGHTENED
CASUALTIES.
SHE HANDS THEM OVER TO A
STRANGER, TO A FOSTER CARE
PARENT.
I BELIEVE THAT CHILDREN HAVE
A RIGHT TO EDUCATION, MEDICAL
NEEDS, MENTAL HEALTH NEEDS.
IF THAT CAN'T HAPPEN, IN THE
HOME, WITH THEIR NATURAL
PARENTS, THEN THEY NEED TO BE
REMOVED.
Reporter: BUT AS OF TONIGHT,
ONLY 175,000 FOSTER FAMILIES IN
AMERICA FOR 500,000 NEEDY KIDS.
MANY STATES PAY AS LITTLE AS $15
PER DAY FOR CHILD.
MANY OF THOSE HOMES ARE
ILL-EQUIPPED TO DEAL WITH THE
CHILDREN THEY RECEIVE.
1500 CHILDREN WILL DIE EACH YEAR
OF ABUSE AND NEGLIGENT.
ONE OF NATION'S LEADING
PROSECUTION THE BLAME SHOULD BE
PLACED ON ALL OF US.
IT TAKES A VILLAGE TO RAISE
CHILD, BUT IT TAKES A VILLAGE TO
PROTECT A CHILD.
Reporter: TAKE THE CASE IN
LOS ANGELES, WHERE EVERYBODY
FAILED THIS LITTLE GIRL, EVERY
EXCEPT THE FOSTER PARENTS WHO
BROUGHT HER SO CLOSE TO
HAPPINESS.
IT WAS LOVE AT FIRST SIGHT
FOR BOTH OF US.
THEY TOOK IN LITTLE SARAH
LONGING TO ADOPT HER.
SHE HAD A SPARKLING BEDROOM.
TOYS, AND A PET THAT SLEPT
PROTECTIVELY OUT OF HER.
THIS WAS HER MOTHER.
I REGRET IT SO MUCH.
Reporter: SOPHIA RESIST
HAVING HER DAUGHTER LIVING WITH
THE TWO PARENTS BECAUSE THEY'RE
GUY.
SARAH'S COURT-APPOINTED LAWYER
NEVER SPOKE ON THE THE LOVING
FOSTER PARENTS.
YOU COULD TELL THAT SARAH WAS
EXPOSED TO EXPLOSIVE VIOLENCE.
SHE KNEW HOW TO CHOKE WITH BOTH
HANDS.
SHE HAD TERRIBLE NIGHTMARES.
THE DPA SHE WAS TAKEN AWAY WAS
AGONY.
SHE STARTED PUTTING THINGS
BACK IN THE DRAWER.
SAYING, NO.
IT WAS THE MOST HELPLESS,
TERRIBLE FEELING.
WE HAD NO CONFIDENCE THAT SHE
WAS GOING TO A SAFE PLACE.
WE SAID BYE.
LIKE SHE KNEW.
Reporter: FIVE MONTHS LATER,
SHE RECEIVED SARAH.
SHE SAW HER HUSBAND WITH SARAH.
HER ARMS SEEMED TWISTED, LIMP.
WHAT HAPPENED TO SARAH.
SHE MUST HAVE FALLEN.
Reporter: THAT'S LITTLE SARAH
WITH HER AUNT.
NURSES SAY SHE WAS QUIET BEYOND
TEARS.
THE AUNT LEFT WITH SARAH BEFORE
SHE COULD BE GIVEN DIE NOSTIC
TEST.
AGAINST THE MEDICAL ADVICE OF
THE DOCTORS, N ONE STOPPED HER
FROM FAMILY.
SEVEN HOURS LATER, SARAH WAS
DEAD.
SARAH HAD BEEN HIT SO BADLY,
SO SAVAGELY IT ACTUALLY SEVERED
HER INS TIN.
HAPPENED FROM SOMEONE HITTING,
KICKING HER, ABUSING HER.
YEAH.
Reporter: DO YOU THINK IT
WOULD HAVE BEEN WORSE TO BE WITH
THE FOSTER PARENTS, THE TWO
WOMEN, THAN THIS?
NO, THIS PROBABLY WOULDN'T
HAVE HAPPENED.
Reporter: THEY ARE IN JAIL.
PLED NOT GUILTY TO MURDER AND
CHILD ABUSE.
SOMETIMES PEOPLE THINK, I
DON'T WANT TO GET INVOLVE.
IT'S NOT MY PLACE.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT'S GOING ON.
BUT, YOU WOULD BE AMAZED BY
TAKING ONE STEP.
HOW THAT CAN CHANGE POSITIVELY
THE LIFE OF A CHILD.
TO SAVE A CHILD'S LIFE.
OUR THANKS TO DIANE SAWYER, A
BILL IS PENDING IN THE
CALIFORNIA'S LEGISLATURE GIVE
FOSTER PARENTS LIKE THE GAY
COUPLE, A ROLE
CYNTHIA McFADDEN WITH A
ALICIA KEYS ON MONDAY.
THAT'S IT FOR TONIGHT.
I'MFADDEN AND TERRY
MORAN, GOOD NIGHT, AMERICA AND
HAVE A GOOD WEEKEND.
Captions by VITAC